---
Title: 1. Two Sum
Link: https://leetcode.com/problems/two-sum/description/
LC Difficulty: Easy
Last Solved: 2025-01-13
Confidence: good
Key Topics: HashMap
---
**Problem Statement**

Given an array of integers `nums` and an integer `target`, return _indices of the two numbers such that they add up to `target`_.

You may assume that each input would have **_exactly_ one solution**, and you may not use the _same_ element twice.

You can return the answer in any order.

**Example 1:**

>**Input:** `nums` = [2,7,11,15], target = 9
>**Output:** [0,1]
>**Explanation:** Because `nums`[0] + `nums`[1] == 9, we return [0, 1].

**Example 2:**

>**Input:** `nums` = [3, 4, 5, 3], target = 6
>**Output:** [0,3]


**Solution**:

**Brute Force**: The most obvious way for solving this is to just check each number against every other number and see if there's a combination that sums to the given target.
```python
class Solution:
    def twoSum(self, nums: List[int], target: int) -> List[int]:
        for i in range(len(nums)):
            for j in range(i + 1, len(nums)):
                if nums[i] + nums[j] == target:
                    return [i, j]
        return []
```

- Time Complexity : $O(n^2)$ because for each element, we're checking all the other elements
- Space Complexity : $O(1)$ because we're not using any extra memory


**Efficient Solution**: The simple trick is to realize that for any given element, say $x$, if an element $target - x$ also exists in the array, then those are the two elements that will sum up to target!

We can utilize a hash map and place an element along with its index in the map as we iterate over the given array. For each `element`, we can query the hash map to check if `target - element` exists in the map. If it does, we just return the indices of these two elements.

```python
class Solution:
    def twoSum(self, nums: List[int], target: int) -> List[int]:
        hmap = {}
        
        for i in range(len(nums)):
            diff = target - nums[i]
            if nums[i] not in hmap:
                hmap[nums[i]] = i
            if diff in hmap and hmap[diff] != i:
                return [i, hmap[diff]]
```

- Time Complexity : $O(n)$ because we are iterating over the entire array and inserting/querying elements in the hash map which are $O(1)$ operations.

- Space Complexity : $O(n)$ because our hash map can potentially have all the elements of the array in the worst case.


